docs: Troubleshooting guide (#627)
Azure/fleet: docs/troubleshooting/README.md

> # Troubleshooting guide

Reviewer: Hi Arvind! Let's talk more about this in our sync today; thanks for the doc work 🙏

## Overview:

This TSG is meant to help you troubleshoot issues with the Fleet APIs.

## Cluster Resource Placement:

Internal Objects to keep in mind when troubleshooting CRP related errors on the hub cluster:
 - **ClusterResourceSnapshot**
 - **ClusterSchedulingPolicySnapshot**
 - **ClusterResourceBinding**
 - **Work** 

please read the API reference for more details about ech object https://github.com/Azure/fleet/blob/main/docs/api-references.md

### How can I debug when my CRP status is ClusterResourcePlacementScheduled condition status is set to "False"?

We need to take a look at the **ClusterSchedulingPolicySnapshot** status to figure out why the scheduler could not schedule the resource for the placement policy specified.

### How to find the latest ClusterSchedulingSnapshot resource?

We need to have ClusterResourcePlacement's name **{CRPName}**, replace **{CRPName}** in the command below,

```
$ kubectl get clusterschedulingpolicysnapshot -l kubernetes-fleet.io/is-latest-snapshot=true,kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-CRP={CRPName}
```

> ### How can I debug when my CRP status is ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized condition status is set to "False"?

Reviewer 2: could you please list when the sync will be set as "false" first?

 providing the troubleshooting steps is helping them to validate the case and find the action item.

Here, you only provide the validation part, but not the action item.

### How can I debug when my CRP ClusterResourcePlacementApplied condition is set to "False"?

In the **ClusterResourcePlacement** status section check to see which **placementStatuses** also has ResourceApplied status set to false.

From the **placementStatuses** we can get the **clusterName** and then use it to find the work object associated with the member cluster in the **fleet-member-{ClusterName}** namespace in the hub cluster and check its status to figure out what's wrong.

### How and where to find the correct Work resource?

We need to have the member cluster's namespace **fleet-member-{clusterName}**, ClusterResourceBinding's name **{CRBName}** and ClusterResourcePlacement's name **{CRPName}**.

```
$ kubectl get work -n fleet-member-{clusterName} -l kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-CRP={CRPName},kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-resource-binding={CRBName} -o YAML
```

### How can I debug when some clusters are not selected as expected?

Check the status of the **ClusterSchedulingPolicySnapshot** to determine which clusters were selected along with the reason

### How can I debug when a selected cluster does not have the expected resources on it?

> We need to take a look at the **placementStatuses** section in CRP status for that particular cluster in ClusterResourcePlacement's status. In **placementStatuses** we would find **failedPlacements** which should have the reason

Reviewer 2: list possible reasons
1. latest ClusterResourceSnapshot has not been created.
2. the sync has not been finished.
3. the apply has not been finished.
4. the apply fails.

please provide validation steps for each case and its action item.

### How to find the latest ClusterResourceSnapshot resource?

Replace **{CRPName}** in the command below with name of CRP

```
$ kubectl get clusterresourcesnapshot -l kubernetes-fleet.io/is-latest-snapshot=true,kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-CRP={CRPName} -o YAML
```

> ### How can I debug when my CRP doesn't pick up the latest change?

Author: Still figuring out the best way to answer this question.

spec:
  policy:
    affinity:
      clusterAffinity:
        requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
          clusterSelectorTerms:
          - labelSelector:
              matchLabels:
                env: prod
    placementType: PickN
  policyHash: ZjE0Yjk4YjYyMTVjY2U3NzQ1MTZkNWRhZjRiNjQ1NzQ4NjllNTUyMzZkODBkYzkyYmRkMGU3OTI3MWEwOTkyNQ==
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-11-27T21:33:01Z"
    message: could not find all the clusters needed as specified by the scheduling
      policy
    observedGeneration: 1
    reason: SchedulingPolicyUnfulfilled
    status: "False"
    type: Scheduled
  observedCRPGeneration: 2
  targetClusters:
  - clusterName: kind-cluster-1
    clusterScore:
      affinityScore: 0
      priorityScore: 0
    reason: picked by scheduling policy
    selected: true
  - clusterName: kind-cluster-2
    reason: 'ClusterUnschedulable, none of the nonempty required cluster affinity
      term (total number: 1) is matched'
    selected: false
```

The solution here is to add the **env:prod** label to the member cluster resource for **kind-cluster-2** as well so that the scheduler can pick the cluster to propagate resources.

> ### How to verify the latest ClusterSchedulingPolicySnapshot for a CRP?

Reviewer 2: Could you please move all of the validating/checking questions to the bottom? they're more like debugging tools/apis.

How to verify the latest ClusterSchedulingPolicySnapshot for a CRP?
How to find the latest ClusterResourceBinding resource?
...

```

- Compare ClusterSchedulingPolicySnapshot with the **CRP's** policy to ensure they match (excluding numberOfClusters field from **CRP's** spec)
- The ClusterSchedulingPolicySnapshot has a label called **number-of-clusters** check to see if it matches the number of clusters requested in **CRP's** **PickN** placement policy.

### How can I debug when my CRP status is ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized condition status is set to "False"?

**ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized** condition status is set to **"False"** if the following occurs, the work is not created/updated for a new **ClusterResourceSnapshot**, **ClusterResourceBinding** for a given cluster.

In the **ClusterResourcePlacement** status section check to see which **placementStatuses** also has WorkSynchronized status set to **false**.

From the **placementStatus** we can get the **clusterName** and then check the **fleet-member-{clusterName}** namespace to see if a work objects exists/updated in this case it won't as **WorkSynchronized** has failed.

We need to find the corresponding **ClusterResourceBinding** for our **ClusterResourcePlacement** which should have the status of **work** create/update.

> A common case where this could happen is user input for the **rollingUpdate** config it too strict for rolling update strategy.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A common case where this could happen is user input for the **rollingUpdate** config it too strict for rolling update strategy.

Please check the **rollingUpdate** strategy to make sure the maxUnavailable and maxSurge meets your expectations.
```

        score: 0, topology spread score: 0): picked by scheduling policy'
      observedGeneration: 2
      reason: ScheduleSucceeded
      status: "True"
      type: ResourceScheduled
    - lastTransitionTime: "2023-11-29T21:49:43Z"
      message: 'In the process of synchronizing or operation is blocked by the rollout
        strategy '
      observedGeneration: 2
      reason: WorkSynchronizePending
      status: "False"
      type: WorkSynchronized
    - lastTransitionTime: "2023-11-29T21:49:43Z"
      message: Works need to be synchronized on the hub cluster or there are still
        manifests pending to be processed by the member cluster
      observedGeneration: 2
      reason: ApplyPending
      status: Unknown
      type: ResourceApplied
  selectedResources:
  - kind: Namespace
    name: test-ns
    version: v1
```

we see that **ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized** is set to false and the message reads **"Works need to be synchronized on the hub cluster or there are still manifests pending to be processed by the 2 member clusters"**. We have this situation cause **rollingUpdate** input was not specified by the user and hence by default,

> **maxUnavailable** is set to 1 and **maxSurge** is set to 1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**maxUnavailable** is set to 25% * 3 (desired number) and rounded to 1 and **maxSurge** is set to 25% * 3 (desired number) and rounded to 1.
```

> Meaning after the CRP was created first two **ClusterResourceBindings** were created and since the namespace didn't exist on the hub cluster we did not have to create work and **ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized** was set to **True**.

Reviewer 2: This's wrong, i remember we still create the work, but the manifest is empty.

But once we create the **test-ns** namespace on the hub the rollout controller tries to pick the two **ClusterResourceBindings** to update, but we have **maxUnavailable** set to 1 which is already the case since we have one missing member cluster now if when the rollout controller tries to roll out the updated **ClusterResourceBindings** and even if one of them fails to apply we break the criteria of the **rollout config** since **maxUnavailable** is set 1.

> The solution to this particular case is to manually set maxUnavailable to a higher value than 2 to avoid this scenario.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The solution to this particular case is to manually set maxUnavailable to a higher value than 2 to loose the rolling update configuration or join the third member cluster.
```

test-crp-kind-cluster-1-be990c3e   True          True               33s
test-crp-kind-cluster-2-ec4d953c   True          True               33s
```

The ClusterResourceBinding's name follow this format **{CRPName}-{clusterName}-{suffix}**, so once we have all ClusterResourceBindings listed find the ClusterResourceBinding for the target cluster you are looking for based on the clusterName.

### How to find the latest ClusterResourceSnapshot resource?

Replace **{CRPName}** in the command below with name of **CRP**,

```
kubectl get clusterresourcesnapshot -l kubernetes-fleet.io/is-latest-snapshot=true,kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-CRP={CRPName} -o YAML
```

### How can I debug when my CRP ClusterResourcePlacementApplied condition is set to "False"?

In the **ClusterResourcePlacement** status section check to see which **placementStatuses** also has ResourceApplied status set to false.

From the **placementStatuses** we can get the **clusterName** and then use it to find the work object associated with the member cluster in the **fleet-member-{ClusterName}** namespace in the hub cluster and check its status to figure out what's wrong.

> example, in this case the **CRP** is trying to propagate a namespace which contains a deployment to two member clusters, but the namespace already exists on one member cluster called **kind-cluster-1**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, in this case the **CRP** is trying to propagate a namespace which contains a deployment to two member clusters, but the namespace already exists on one member cluster called **kind-cluster-1**
```

      kind: Namespace
      name: test-ns
      version: v1
  - clusterName: kind-cluster-2
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2023-11-28T20:56:15Z"
      message: 'Successfully scheduled resources for placement in kind-cluster-2:
        picked by scheduling policy'
      observedGeneration: 2
      reason: ScheduleSucceeded
      status: "True"
      type: ResourceScheduled
    - lastTransitionTime: "2023-11-28T20:56:15Z"
      message: Successfully Synchronized work(s) for placement
      observedGeneration: 2
      reason: WorkSynchronizeSucceeded
      status: "True"
      type: WorkSynchronized
    - lastTransitionTime: "2023-11-28T20:56:21Z"
      message: Successfully applied resources
      observedGeneration: 2
      reason: ApplySucceeded
      status: "True"
      type: ResourceApplied
  selectedResources:
  - group: apps
    kind: Deployment
    name: test-nginx
    namespace: test-ns
    version: v1
  - kind: Namespace
    name: test-ns
    version: v1
```

in the **placementStatuses** section of the **CRP status** for kind-cluster-1 in **failedPlacements** we get a clear message as to why the resource failed to apply on the member cluster.

> At times, we might need more information in that case please take a look at the work object

Reviewer 2: provide the link how to find the corresponding work?

**work status:**
```
 status:
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2023-11-28T21:07:15Z"
      message: Failed to apply work
      observedGeneration: 1
      reason: AppliedWorkFailed
      status: "False"
      type: Applied
    manifestConditions:
    - conditions:
      - lastTransitionTime: "2023-11-28T20:56:16Z"
        message: ManifestNoChange
        observedGeneration: 1
        reason: ManifestNoChange
        status: "True"
        type: Applied
      identifier:
        group: apps
        kind: Deployment
        name: test-nginx
        namespace: test-ns
        ordinal: 0
        resource: deployments
        version: v1
    - conditions:
      - lastTransitionTime: "2023-11-28T20:56:16Z"
        message: 'Failed to apply manifest: resource is not managed by the work controller'
        reason: AppliedManifestFailedReason
        status: "False"
        type: Applied
      identifier:
        kind: Namespace
        name: test-ns
        ordinal: 1
        resource: namespaces
        version: v1
```

> from looking at the **work status** and specifically the **manifestConditions** section we could see that the namespace could not be applied but the deployment within the namespace got propagated from hub to the member cluster correctly. In this case to solve this issue maybe delete the existing namespace on the member cluster but that's upto the user to decide since the namespace could already contain resources within it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
From looking at the **work status** and specifically the **manifestConditions** section we could see that the namespace could not be applied but the deployment within the namespace got propagated from hub to the member cluster correctly. In this case to solve this issue maybe delete the existing namespace on the member cluster but that's upto the user to decide since the namespace could already contain resources within it.
```

### How and where to find the correct Work resource?

We need to have the member cluster's namespace **fleet-member-{clusterName}**, ClusterResourceBinding's name **{CRBName}** and ClusterResourcePlacement's name **{CRPName}**.

```
kubectl get work -n fleet-member-{clusterName} -l kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-CRP={CRPName},kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-resource-binding={CRBName} -o YAML
```

### How can I debug when some clusters are not selected as expected?

Check the status of the **ClusterSchedulingPolicySnapshot** to determine which clusters were selected along with the reason.

### How can I debug when a selected cluster does not have the expected resources on it/ if CRP doesn't pick up the latest changes?

Please check the following cases,
- check to see if **ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized** condition in CRP status is set to **True** or **False**
- If it's set to **false** check this [question](#how-can-i-debug-when-my-crp-status-is-clusterresourceplacementsynchronized-condition-status-is-set-to--false--)
- If it's set to **True**,
  - check to see if **ClusterResourcePlacementApplied** condition is set to **Unknown**, **False** or **True**

>   - if it's set to **Unknown** please wait as the resources are still being applied to the member clusters (if it's stuck in unknown state please raise a github issue as it's an unexpected behavior)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - if it's set to **Unknown** please wait as the resources are still being applied to the member clusters (if it's stuck in unknown state for a while, please raise a github issue as it's an unexpected behavior)
```

    conditions:
      ...
      type: ResourceApplied
  - clusterName: kind-cluster-2
    conditions:
      ...
      reason: ApplySucceeded
      status: "True"
      type: ResourceApplied
```

Output we receive after running the command listed above to get the `ClusterResourceBindings`,

```
kubectl get clusterresourcebinding -l kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-CRP=test-crp 
NAME                               WORKCREATED   RESOURCESAPPLIED   AGE
test-crp-kind-cluster-1-be990c3e   True          True               33s
test-crp-kind-cluster-2-ec4d953c   True          True               33s
```

The `ClusterResourceBinding` name follows this format `{CRPName}-{clusterName}-{suffix}`, so once we have all ClusterResourceBindings listed find the `ClusterResourceBinding` for the target cluster you are looking for based on the `clusterName`.

## How to find the latest ClusterResourceSnapshot resource?

Replace `{CRPName}` in the command below with name of `ClusterResourcePlacement`,

```
kubectl get clusterresourcesnapshot -l kubernetes-fleet.io/is-latest-snapshot=true,kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-CRP={CRPName} -o YAML
```

## How and where to find the correct Work resource?

> We need to have the member cluster's namespace which follow this format `fleet-member-{clusterName}`, `ClusterResourceBinding` name `{CRBName}` and `ClusterResourcePlacement` name `{CRPName}`.

Reviewer 2: we don't need the `ClusterResourceBinding` name right? we can still get the work created for the CRP.

    selected: false
```

#### Resolution:
The solution here is to add the `env:prod` label to the member cluster resource for `kind-cluster-2` as well, so that the scheduler can select the cluster to propagate resources.

### How can I debug when my CRP status is ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized condition status is set to "False"?

The **ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized** condition status is set to **"False"** under the following circumstances: when the work is not created or updated for a new **ClusterResourceSnapshot**.

#### **Investigation Steps:**

- In the **ClusterResourcePlacement** status section, examine the **placementStatuses** to identify clusters with the `WorkSynchronized` status set to **"False"**.
- Locate the corresponding **ClusterResourceBinding** for the identified cluster. This resource should indicate the status of the `Work`, whether it was created or updated.
- A common scenario leading to this issue is the user input for the **rollingUpdate** configuration being too strict. Verify the values for `maxUnavailable` and `maxSurge` to ensure they align with your expectations.

> #### **Example Scenario:**

Reviewer 2: sometimes you're using ** and sometimes you are not. Can we make them consistent?

      type: ResourceApplied
```

Given that the resource **test-ns** namespace never existed on the hub cluster, the `ClusterResourcePlacement` status reflects the following:

> - `ClusterResourcePlacementApplied` is set to `true`
> - `ClusterResourcePlacementScheduled` is set to `false`, as the specified policy aims to pick three clusters, but the scheduler can only accommodate placement in two currently available and joined clusters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `ClusterResourcePlacementScheduled` is set to `false`, as the specified policy aims to pick three clusters, but the scheduler can only accommodate placement in two currently available and joined clusters.
- `ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized` is set to `true`
- `ClusterResourcePlacementApplied` is set to `true`
```

#### ClusterResourceBinding for kind-cluster-1:
```
apiVersion: placement.kubernetes-fleet.io/v1beta1
kind: ClusterResourceBinding
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: "2023-12-05T04:17:49Z"
  finalizers:
  - kubernetes-fleet.io/work-cleanup
  generation: 2
  labels:
    kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-CRP: test-crp
  name: test-crp-kind-cluster-1-4e5c873b
  resourceVersion: "2572"
  uid: 8ae9741d-e95c-44f8-b36a-29d73f6b833c
spec:
  clusterDecision:
    clusterName: kind-cluster-1
    clusterScore:
      affinityScore: 0
      priorityScore: 0
    reason: picked by scheduling policy
    selected: true
  resourceSnapshotName: test-crp-0-snapshot
  schedulingPolicySnapshotName: test-crp-0
  state: Bound
  targetCluster: kind-cluster-1
status:
  conditions:
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-12-05T04:17:50Z"
    message: ""
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: AllWorkSynced
    status: "True"
    type: Bound
  - lastTransitionTime: "2023-12-05T04:17:50Z"
    message: ""
    observedGeneration: 2
    reason: AllWorkHasBeenApplied
    status: "True"
    type: Applied
```

> Upon inspecting the `ClusterResourceBinding` spec, we observe that the `resourceSnapshotName` matches the latest `ClusterResourceSnapshot` name. Additionally, both the `Bound` and `Applied` conditions are set to True.

Reviewer 2: can we delete these statements? too much for the reader to follow. You just want to demonstrate why the synchronize is false after changing the resources.

These contents are unrelated.

    version: v1
```

Upon examination, the `ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized` status is found to be `false`, accompanied by a message indicating that "**Works need to be synchronized on the hub cluster, or there are still manifests pending to be processed by the 2 member clusters.**"

> Let's check the latest `ClusterResourceSnapshot`, please check this [section](#how-to-find-the-latest-clusterresourcesnapshot-resource) for more details,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's check the latest `ClusterResourceSnapshot`. Please refer to this [section](#how-to-find-the-latest-clusterresourcesnapshot-resource) to learn how to get the latest `ClusterResourceSnapshot`.
```

#### Latest ClusterResourceSnapshot:
```
metadata:
  annotations:
    kubernetes-fleet.io/number-of-enveloped-object: "0"
    kubernetes-fleet.io/number-of-resource-snapshots: "1"
    kubernetes-fleet.io/resource-hash: 72344be6e268bc7af29d75b7f0aad588d341c228801aab50d6f9f5fc33dd9c7c
  creationTimestamp: "2023-12-05T04:36:24Z"
  generation: 1
  labels:
    kubernetes-fleet.io/is-latest-snapshot: "true"
    kubernetes-fleet.io/parent-CRP: test-crp
    kubernetes-fleet.io/resource-index: "1"
  name: test-crp-1-snapshot
  ownerReferences:
  - apiVersion: placement.kubernetes-fleet.io/v1beta1
    blockOwnerDeletion: true
    controller: true
    kind: ClusterResourcePlacement
    name: test-crp
    uid: 1c474983-cda0-49cb-bf60-3d2a42f122ba
  resourceVersion: "4489"
  uid: a520f775-14cc-4bf5-b8cd-c4efc0e2be34
spec:
  selectedResources:
  - apiVersion: v1
    kind: Namespace
    metadata:
      labels:
        kubernetes.io/metadata.name: test-ns
      name: test-ns
    spec:
      finalizers:
      - kubernetes
```

Upon inspecting `ClusterResourceSnapshot` spec, we observe that the `selectedResources` section now has the namespace `test-ns`.

> Let's check the `ClusterResourceBinding` for `kind-cluster-1` to see if it got updated after the namespace `test-ns` was created, please check this [section](#how-to-find-the-latest-clusterresourcebinding-resource) for more details,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's check the `ClusterResourceBinding` for `kind-cluster-1` to see if it got updated after the namespace `test-ns` was created. Please check this [section](#how-to-find-the-latest-clusterresourcebinding-resource) to learn how to get the latest `ClusterResourceBinding`.
```

2. Upon creating the `test-ns` namespace on the hub, the rollout controller attempted to update the two existing `ClusterResourceBindings`. However, the `rollingUpdate` configuration was too strict: `maxUnavailable` was set to 1, which was already the case due to a missing member cluster. If, during the update, even one of the bindings failed to apply, it would violate the `rollingUpdate` configuration since `maxUnavailable` was set to 1.

#### Resolution:
- To address this specific issue, consider manually setting `maxUnavailable` to a value greater than 2 to relax the `rollingUpdate` configuration.
- Alternatively, you can also join a third member cluster.

### How can I debug when my CRP ClusterResourcePlacementApplied condition is set to "False"?

#### Investigation steps:

1. Check `placementStatuses`: In the `ClusterResourcePlacement` status section, inspect the `placementStatuses` to identify which clusters have the `ResourceApplied` condition set to `false` and note down their `clusterName`.

> 2. Locate `Work` Object in Hub Cluster: Use the identified `clusterName` to locate the `Work` object associated with the member cluster.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Locate `Work` Object in Hub Cluster: Use the identified `clusterName` to locate the `Work` object associated with the member cluster. Please refer to xxx to learn how to get the `Work`.
```

### How can I debug when some clusters are not selected as expected?

Check the status of the `ClusterSchedulingPolicySnapshot` to determine which clusters were selected along with the reason.

### How can I debug when a selected cluster does not have the expected resources on it or if CRP doesn't pick up the latest changes?

Please check the following cases,
- Check to see if `ClusterResourcePlacementSynchronized` condition in CRP status is set to `true` or `false`.
- If it's set to `false` check this [question](#how-can-i-debug-when-my-crp-status-is-clusterresourceplacementsynchronized-condition-status-is-set-to--false--).
- If it's set to `true`,
  - Check to see if `ClusterResourcePlacementApplied` condition is set to `unknown`, `false` or `true`.
  - If it's set to `unknown`, please wait as the resources are still being applied to the member cluster (if it's stuck in unknown state for a while, please raise a github issue as it's an unexpected behavior).
  - If it's set to `false`, check this [question](#how-can-i-debug-when-my-crp-clusterresourceplacementapplied-condition-is-set-to--false--).

>   - If it's set to `true`, check to see if the resource exists on the hub cluster. The `ClusterResourcePlacementApplied` condition is set to `true` if the resource doesn't exist on the hub.

Reviewer 2: - If it's set to `true`, check to see if the resource exists on the hub cluster.~~The `ClusterResourcePlacementApplied` condition is set to `true` if the resource doesn't exist on the hub.~~

The second statement looks confusing.
